doc/manual: Add contract manual (#2821)
nitlang/nit: doc/manual/contract.md

# Contract Programming

> Nit supports contract programming like Eiffel. Contracts can be seen as the materialization of specifications in the code itself. The idea is to define the behavior of a property using conditions which will be evaluated on runtime.

Reviewer: If it's a lot like Effeil, the documentation feels a lot like the one from Cofoja 😂

In Nit all the conditions of contract must be expressed using boolean expression in the same way as an assertion. Note that the potential routines that compose the condition of the contract should have no side effects.

## Method/Attribute contract

> Methods and attributes (setter) can be associated with two types of contracts, entry contracts (expect) and exit contracts (ensure). Together, they make it possible to define the rules to be respected between the called and the caller. If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry then the caller can assume that the called fulfills the `ensure` condition on exit.

Reviewer 2: J'utiliserais plutôt le terme "callee" au lieu de "called" pour désigner la méthode appelée. Dans la phrase:
`Together, they make it possible to define the rules to be respected between the called and the caller`
`Together, they define the rules to be respected between the called and the callee`

Les mots "make it possible" sont superflus.

Author: Yes you are right i need to use callee :+1:

Both are declared, between the definition of the signature followed by the keyword `is` and the block start keyword `do`.

### Expect

> We define a precondition using the annotation `expect`. Here is an example with a `pop` method which removes the last element of the stack. It defines as a precondition to its call that the stack must not be empty.

Reviewer 2: J'écrirais plutôt: 

The following example shows how a precondition warns that a call to the  `pop` function should be made on a non-empty stack.

~~~
	fun pop
	is
		expect(not_empty)
	do
		# Remove the last item on the stack
	end
~~~

### Ensure

> We define a postcondition using the annotation `ensure`. Here is an example with a `push` method which adds the element received as an argument (`object`) at the top of the stack. It defines as guaranteed to the caller that the object will be added at the top of the stack `self [size] == object`.

Reviewer 2: Remplace "It defines as guaranteed" par "It garantees to the caller..."

~~~
	fun push(object: T)
	is
		ensure(self[size] == object)
	do
		# Add the given argument `object` on top of the stack
	end
~~~

The `ensure` contract offers the possibility of referring to the return value of the method, using the keyword `result`. Example the `get_at` method which returns the object which is stored at the index received as an argument (`index`). It guarantees the caller that the returned element represented by `result` corresponds to the element stored in the stack with the given index `result == self [index]`.

~~~
	fun get_at(index: Int): T
	is
		ensure(result == self[index])
	do
		# Return the element at the given index.
	end
~~~

> The `ensure` contract allows to refer to the values in a context before the execution of the method. For this we use the keyword `old` followed by the expression to be evaluated in parenthesis. Example with the `pop` method introduced previously, the contract guarantees that, when it's called to remove the last element from the stack the total size at exit must be equal to the previous size minus one `old (size) - 1 = = size`.

Reviewer 2: "The `ensure` contract allows to refer to the values in a context before the execution of the method. For this we use the keyword `old` followed by the expression to be evaluated in parenthesis"
Pour:
Using the keyword `old` we can refer to any arguments and instance variable before the method call.

~~~
	fun pop(object: T)
	is
		ensure(old(size) - 1 == size)
	do
		# Remove the last item on the stack
	end
~~~

### Additional informations

* When defining a `ensure` or `expect` contract on an attribute, only the automatically generated write property will use the contract.

~~~
	var baz: Int is expect(baz > 0) # In the contract, baz refers to the parameter of the write property (setter).
~~~

> * The `ensure` or `expect` contracts are evaluated in the same context as the called method, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods and parameters in the condition.

Reviewer: Always present them in the same order as to not confuse people of which is the keyword for before and which is the one for after.

> * In `ensure` contracts, the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.

Reviewer: I would move this where you talk about `result`

> * The expression contained in an `old` is evaluated in the same context as the called method. Thus, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods, and arguments.

Reviewer: Same, move it close to the introduction of `old`

* `old(object)` stores a reference to object. By doing so, if `object` is mutated in the method the `old (object)` will also be mutated. To avoid this it's necessary to provide a way to duplicate the object like `clone` method so that `not old (object.clone).is_same_instance (object)` will be true. In the stack example the expresion `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack) && old(stack.size) != old(stack).size` is true. If you need to `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack)` to be false, you need to provide a method to duplicate the object, such as `not old(stack.clone).is_same_instance(stack)` be true.

> * Contracts can be declared in several ways, all are equivalent:

Reviewer: I would move that when you present it line 11

~~~
	fun foo(a: Int, b: Int)
	is
		ensure(a > 0, b < 0)
	do
		# Do something
	end

	fun foo
	is
		ensure(a > 0 and b < 0)
	do
		# Do something
	end

	fun foo
	is
		ensure(a > 0)
		ensure(b < 0)
	do
		# Do something
	end
~~~

## Class/interface

### Invariant

> Invariants are used to specify the characteristics of a class/interface which must always be true, except when executing a member function. In other words, invariants define conditions that must be respected by our instance. Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as incoherent. Finally, invariants must hold before and after any method called (except those called by `self` directly).

Reviewer: How does this work regarding constructors? Are invariants checked right after? Can I have a custom `init`?

To define an invariant we use the class annotation `invariant`. Here is an example with our Stack. The class defines that it is impossible to be in a state where the size is less than 0.

~~~
	class Stack
		invariant(size >= 0)
	end
~~~

Another example with a class that represents a date (day, month). To be in a consistent state, the date must be represented with a day between 1 and 31 and a month between 1 and 12.

~~~
	class Date

> 		invariant(day >= 1 and day <= 31)

Reviewer: This example is very good to show the `init` behavior regarding `invariant`

		invariant(month >= 1 and month <= 12)
	end
~~~

### Additional informations

> * The invariant is only checked at the end of a constructor.

Reviewer: Should have said so when introducing the concept.

> * By default, the invariants are only checked on exit. See section `Verification policy` to activate them on in and out.

Reviewer: All how this could be stated from the start.

## Inheritance

> The Nit contracts fully support inheritance (single or multiple) and refinement. The specialization can be interpreted as subcontracting. Subcontracting element must keep the set of promises initially defined by all previous contractors. Here are the subtyping rules for each type of the contracts:

Reviewer: Is it the first time you use the `promises`? Why introducing a new concept that far in the document?

Reviewer: Same for `contractors`

> * The `expect` can be weakened, which guarantees that all the contracts introduced in the previous definitions will always be considered as valid entries. During the specialization of a method it will be possible to redefine its precondition in order the widen the allowed input.

Reviewer: Give some example, it's way easier to explain it.

* The `invariant` can be reinforced, which guarantees that constraints of validated state previously defined in the superclasses/interfaces will be respected. The specialization of a class makes it possible to restrict all of the valid states. The objective is that an object must always be considered as a coherent value of all of its superclasses/interfaces.

Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no contract`  annotation (use this annotation only when it's really necessary).

## Runtime

When performing the evaluation of a contract, all routines and elements will be executed without the evaluation of contracts. The objective is to remove the potential risk of falling into an infinite loop of verification.

### Execution order

For the public methods/attribute, the evaluation order is as follows:

1- invariant
2- preconditions (`expect`)
3- called property
4- postconditions (`ensure`)
5- invariant

For constructors only the first step is ignored.

### Verification policy

> Since contracts are expensive in resource, Nit offers several levels of contract verification in order to adapt them to the context:

Reviewer 2: Enlève la partie "in order to adapt them to the context", ces mots n'appartent pas de valeur à la compréhension.

Default: In default mode the contracts can be defined as "semi-global". I.E. All contracts (ensure, expect, invariant) used in the main modules are enabled, expects contracts are enabled (ensure, invariant contracts are disable) in direct imported modules. Other indirected imported modules doesn't have active contract.

Full contract: Enable contracts on all modules(`--full-contract` option). Warning: this is an expensive option at runtime.

No contract: all contracts are disabled (option --no-contract).

> In out invariant: As indicated previously, invariants are enabled only in exit. It is however possible to activate them on entry and exit with the `--in-out-invariant` option.

Reviewer 2: It is however possible to activate them on entry and exit with the `--in-out-invariant` option.
-> 
It is, however, possible to activate them on entry and exit with the `--in-out-invariant` option.

You can put contract on different elements of the language: methods, attributes, interfaces and classes in order to verify the conformity of the implementation compared with the specification. Different type of contracts exists; the preconditions (`expect`) which check the conditions before execution, the postconditions (`ensure`) which checks the conditions after execution and the invariants (`invariant`) which checks that the conditions remain unchanged.

The implementation of contracts is recommended when you are dealing with business rules. For example when you are developing a library it may be necessary to specify contracts to guarantee valid use of the API. Also, contracts support inheritance, which guarantees that contracts will be satisfied in future specification.

Let us take a look at the `Stack` class bellow:

~~~
	class Stack[T]
		invariant(size >= 0)

		var data = new Array[T]

		var size = 0

> 		fun is_empty: Bool do return size == 0

Reviewer: ```
ensure(result == (size == 0))
```

I think wirh design by contracts you're supposed to give post conditions of your derived requests based on on the primitive ones.

> 		# Add the given argument `object` on top of the stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		# Add `object` on top of the stack
```

> 		fun push(object: T)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		fun push(item: T)
```

		is
			ensure(size == old(size) + 1)
			ensure(data[size-1] == object)
		do
			top += 1
			data[top] = object
		end

> 		# Remove the last item on the stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		# Remove the item on top of the stack
```

		fun pop
		is
			expect(not is_empty)
			ensure(size == old(size) - 1)
		do
			data.pop
			top -= 1
		end

> 		# Return the element at the given index.

Reviewer: Object, item or element? Pick on and stick to it :)

> 		fun get_at(index: Int): T

Reviewer: You could define `[]` to be more nitesque

		is
			expect(index < size)
			ensure(result == self[index])
		do
			return self[index]
		end
	end
~~~

> As you can see the contracts are defined using several annotations. `invariant` which designates the class invariants, `expect` which designates the preconditions and `ensure` which designates the postconditions. The conditions of a contract must be expressed using boolean expressions in the same way as assertions. Each contract of this example will be detailed in a section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see the contracts are defined using several annotations: `invariant` which designates the class invariants, `expect` which designates the preconditions and `ensure` which designates the postconditions. The conditions of a contract must be expressed using boolean expressions in the same way as assertions. Each contract of this example will be detailed in the sections below.
```

> All Contracts conditions can be declared in several ways, all are equivalent:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All contracts conditions can be declared in several ways, all are equivalent:
```

~~~
	fun foo(a: Int, b: Int) is ensure(a > 0, b < 0)

	fun foo is ensure(a > 0 and b < 0)

	fun foo is ensure(a > 0), ensure(b < 0)

> ~~~

Reviewer: Which one is the recommended way?

## Writing contracts

> Methods, as well as attribute setters, can be associated with two types of contracts, entry contracts precondition (`expect`) and exit contracts postcondition (`ensure`). Together, they define the rules to be respected between the callee and the caller. If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry then the caller can assume that the callee fulfill the `ensure` condition on exit.

Reviewer: Should it be `contract's precondition`?

All contracts (`expect`, `ensure`) are evaluated in the same context as the called method, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods and parameters in the condition.

When defining a contract (`expect`, `ensure`) on an attribute like bellow, only the automatically generated write property (setter) will use the contract.

~~~

> 	var baz: Int is expect(baz > 0) # In the contract, baz refers to the parameter of the write property (setter).

Reviewer: If I understand properly I can use an expect and a ensure on a attribute, one will be used on the getter and the other one on the setter?

Author: When applying an expect or a ensure only the setter is impacted. It was not really clear which solution was best. It depends on the context, do we want to guarantee that the attribute has been correctly assigned or do we want to guarantee that the returned value is valid. In all cases it's possible to add contracts to the getter.

```nit
	redef fun attribute
	is
		ensure[...]
	do
		return _attribut
	end
```

~~~

### Define preconditions with `expect`

We define a precondition using the annotation `expect`. In the `Stack` class, the method `pop` defines a precondition, that a call to the method should be made on a non-empty stack.

~~~
	fun pop is expect(not_empty)
~~~

### Define postconditions with `ensure`

We define a postcondition using the annotation `ensure`. In the `Stack` class, the method `push` defines postconditions. The first guarantee defines that, the method must add the element received as argument (`object`) at the top of the stack.

~~~
	fun push(object: T) is ensure(self[size - 1] == object)
~~~

Within an `ensure` contract you can refer to the return value of the method with the keyword `result`. In the `Stack` class, the `get_at` method guarantees that, the return value is the same as the element stored in the stack at the given index.

~~~
	fun get_at(index: Int): T is ensure(result == self[index])
~~~

> Note that, the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.
```

> In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.

Reviewer: You use "we" in some places and "you" in other. We should change them all to "we"

> In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, with the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.
```

~~~
	fun pop(object: T) is ensure(old(size) - 1 == size)
~~~

In an `old(expression)` the `expression` is evaluated in the same context as the called method. Thus, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods, and arguments.

> `old(object)` stores a reference to object. By doing so, if `object` is mutated in the method the `old (object)` will also be mutated. To avoid this, it's necessary to provide a way to duplicate the object like `clone` method so that `not old(object.clone).is_same_instance (object)` will be true. In the stack example, the expression `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack) && old(stack.size) != old(stack).size` is true. If you need to `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack)` to be false, you need to provide a method to duplicate the object, such as `not old(stack.clone).is_same_instance(stack)` be true.

Reviewer: I would give an example of client with a concrete and non trivial `T` implementing `clone` and `==`

## Writing invariants

> Invariants are used to specify the characteristics of a class/interface which must always be true, except when executing a member function. In other words, invariants define conditions that must be respected by our instance. Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as incoherent. Finally, invariants must hold before and after any method called (except those called by `self` directly).

Reviewer: About that last sentence: give an example

Reviewer: Also I think you can move it after the basic example

To define an invariant we use the class annotation `invariant`. Here is an example with our Stack. The class defines that it is impossible to be in a state where the size is less than 0.

~~~
	class Stack
		invariant(size >= 0)
	end
~~~

Another example with a class that represents a date (day, month). To be in a consistent state, the date must be represented with a day between 1 and 31 and a month between 1 and 12.

~~~
	class Date
		invariant(day >= 1 and day <= 31)
		invariant(month >= 1 and month <= 12)

		var day: Int
		var month: Int
	end
~~~

When a class defines an invariant all methods and constructors (inherited, redefined and introduced) will check this one. By default, the invariants are only checked on exit. See section `Verification policy` to activate them on in and out. For all constructors the invariant is only checked at the end of this, this is due to the fact that the object is not yet initialized. See the section `Execution order` for example.

## Inheritance

> The Nit contracts fully support inheritance (single or multiple) and refinement. The specialization can be interpreted as subcontracting. Subcontracting element must keep the set of conditions defined by all previous contractors. Nous alons prendre pour example la définition. Here are the subtyping rules for each type of the contracts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Nit contracts fully support multiple inheritance and refinement. The specialization can be interpreted as subcontracting. Subcontracting element must keep the set of conditions defined by all previous contractors. Nous alons prendre pour example la définition. Here are the subtyping rules for each type of the contracts:
```

Reviewer: Subcontracting "elements"? What does this refer to?

Reviewer: Il y'a du français dans le texte et "allons"* :p

* The `expect` can be weakened, which guarantees that all the contracts introduced in the previous definitions will always be considered as valid entries. During the specialization of a method it will be possible to redefine its precondition in order the widen the allowed input.

Example:
~~~

> 	class MyClass

Reviewer: Can we think about a more realistic example?

| MySub    | `result > 0 and result > 10`                  |
| MySubSub | `result > 0 and result > 10 and result > 100` |

When refinement a postcondition (`ensure`) the new condition is equivalent to an `and` between the set of inherited postconditions.

* The `invariant` can be reinforced, which guarantees that constraints of validated state previously defined in the superclasses/interfaces must be respected. The specialization of a class makes it possible to restrict all of the valid states. The objective is that an object must always be considered as a coherent value of all of its superclasses/interfaces.

Example:
~~~
	class MyClass
		invariant(i > 0)
		var i: Int
	end

	class MySub
		super MyClass
		invariant(i > 10)
	end

	class MySubSub
		super MySub
		invariant(i > 100)
	end
~~~

| Class    | Condition of `invariant`       |
|----------|--------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `i > 0`                        |
| MySub    | `i > 0 and i > 10`             |
| MySubSub | `i > 0 and i > 10 and i > 100` |

When we specialize or refine a class, its invariant is equal to an `and` between the set of inherited invariants and the new condition.

> Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no contract`  annotation (use this annotation only when it's really necessary).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no_contract`  annotation (use this annotation only when it's really necessary).
```

	stack.pop
	stack.pop
	# stack.pop # Causes an assertion failed because the stack is empty
	# stack.size = -1 # Causes an assertion failed because a stack cannot have a size < 0
~~~

### Execution order

~~~
	class A
		invariant(i > 10)

		var i: Int

		init default(i: Int)
		is
			expect(i > 0)
			ensure(self.i = i + 10)
		do
			_i = i + 10
		end

		fun foo(x: Int): Bool
		is
			expect( x > 0 )
			ensure( result == true )
		do
			return true
		end
	end

	var a = new A(2)
	a.foo
~~~

This is the evaluation order of the `var a = new A(2)` :

1- preconditions (`expect(i > 0)`)
2- called property (execution of the method body)
3- postconditions (`ensure(self.i = i + 10)`)
4- invariant (`invariant(i > 10)`)

This is the evaluation order of the `a.foo` :

1- invariant (`invariant(i > 10)`)
2- preconditions (`expect( x > 0 )`)
3- called property (execution of the method body)
4- postconditions (`result == true`)
5- invariant (`invariant(i > 10)`)

To summarize the evaluation order for public methods/attribute, is as follows:

1- invariant
2- preconditions (`expect`)
3- called property
4- postconditions (`ensure`)
5- invariant

> For constructors only the invariant verification in entry (first step) is ignored.

Reviewer: Perfect place to add an example with `super`

~~~
	fun push(object: T) is ensure(self[size - 1] == object)
~~~

Within an `ensure` contract we can refer to the return value of the method with the keyword `result`. In the `Stack` class, the `[]` method guarantees that, the return value is the same as the element stored in the stack at the given index.

~~~
	fun [](index: Int): T is ensure(result == data[index])
~~~

Note that the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.

In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, with the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.

~~~
	fun pop(object: T) is ensure(old(size) - 1 == size)
~~~

In an `old(expression)` the `expression` is evaluated in the same context as the called method. Thus, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods, and arguments.

> `old(object)` stores a reference to object. By doing so, if `object` is mutated in the method the `old (object)` will also be mutated. To avoid this, it's necessary to provide a way to duplicate the object like `clone` method so that `not old(object.clone).is_same_instance (object)` will be true. In the stack example, the expression `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack) && old(stack.size) != old(stack).size` is true. If we need to `old(stack).is_same_instance(stack)` to be false, we need to provide a method to duplicate the object, such as `not old(stack.clone).is_same_instance(stack)` be true.

Reviewer 3: instead of dupicatin object is it often better to captue only the insteresting part. e.g.

```nit
ensure(old(foo).bar == foo.bar + 1) # bad 
ensure(old(foo.bar) == foo.bar + 1) # better
```

## Writing invariants

> Invariants are used to specify the characteristics of a class/interface which must always be true, except when executing a member function. In other words, invariants define conditions that must be respected by our instance. Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as incoherent.

Reviewer 3: *considered as incoherent* weird grammar

Author: _Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as in an incoherent state, and will cause an assertion failed._
Is it better like that?

To define an invariant we use the class annotation `invariant`. Here is an example with our Stack. The class defines that it is impossible to be in a state where the size is less than 0.

~~~
	class Stack
		invariant(size >= 0)
	end
~~~

Another example with a class that represents a date (day, month). To be in a consistent state, the date must be represented with a day between 1 and 31 and a month between 1 and 12.

~~~
	class Date
		invariant(day >= 1 and day <= 31)
		invariant(month >= 1 and month <= 12)

		var day: Int
		var month: Int
	end
~~~

> When a class defines an invariant all methods and constructors (inherited, redefined and introduced) will check this one. By default, the invariants are only checked on exit. See section `Verification policy` to activate them on in and out. For all constructors the invariant is only checked at the end of this, this is due to the fact that the object is not yet initialized. See the section `Execution order` for example.

Reviewer 3: Maybe says that invariants are expensive because of that,

| MySub    | `result > 0 and result > 10`                  |
| MySubSub | `result > 0 and result > 10 and result > 100` |

When refinement a postcondition (`ensure`) the new condition is equivalent to an `and` between the set of inherited postconditions.

* The `invariant` can be reinforced, which guarantees that constraints of validated state previously defined in the superclasses/interfaces must be respected. The specialization of a class makes it possible to restrict all of the valid states. The objective is that an object must always be considered as a coherent value of all of its superclasses/interfaces.

Example:
~~~
	class MyClass
		invariant(i > 0)
		var i: Int
	end

	class MySub
		super MyClass
		invariant(i > 10)
	end

	class MySubSub
		super MySub
		invariant(i > 100)
	end
~~~

| Class    | Condition of `invariant`       |
|----------|--------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `i > 0`                        |
| MySub    | `i > 0 and i > 10`             |
| MySubSub | `i > 0 and i > 10 and i > 100` |

When we specialize or refine a class, its invariant is equal to an `and` between the set of inherited invariants and the new condition.

> Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no_contract`  annotation (use this annotation only when it's really necessary).

Reviewer 3: "when it's really necessary" and you know what you are doing

Example:
~~~
	class MyClass
		fun foo(x: Int) is abstract, ensure(x == 0)
	end

	class MySub
		super MyClass

		redef fun foo(x: Int) is no_contract
	end
~~~

| Class   | Condition of `foo(x)` |
|---------|-----------------------|
| MyClass | `i == 0`              |

> | MySub   | `Null`                |

Reviewer 3: `Null` is not a real condition. Maybe use *none* (without code formatting) or `true` ?

~~~
class Stack[T]
	invariant(size >= 0)

	var data = new Array[T]

	var size = 0

	fun is_empty: Bool
	is
		ensure(result == (size == 0))
	do
		return size == 0
	end

	# Add `item` on top of the stack
	fun push(item: T)
	is
		ensure(size == old(size) + 1)
		ensure(data[size-1] == item)
	do
		data[size] = item
		size += 1
	end

	# Remove the item on top of the stack
	fun pop
	is
		expect(not is_empty)
		ensure(size == old(size) - 1)
	do
		data.pop
		size -= 1
	end

	# Return the item at the given index.
	fun [](index: Int): T
	is
		expect(index < size)
		expect(index >= 0)
		ensure(result == data[index])
	do
		return data[index]
	end

	# Set the item at the given index
	fun []=(index: Int, item: T)
	is
		expect(index >= 0)
		expect(index <= size)
	do
		data[index] = item
	end
end
~~~

As we can see the contracts are defined using several annotations: `invariant` which designates the class invariants, `expect` which designates the preconditions and `ensure` which designates the postconditions. The conditions of a contract must be expressed using boolean expressions in the same way as assertions. Each contract of this example will be detailed in the sections below.

> By default when you compile or interpret (`nitc stack.nit` or `nit stack.nit`) a program, all contracts (`ensure`, `expect`, `invariant`) used in the main module are enabled, direct imported modules have only the expects contracts enabled (`ensure` and `invariant` contracts are disabled). The other indirect imported modules don't have active contracts. We can use options to change the contract rule see `Options` section for more information.

Reviewer: I think it will be easier to understand if we can related to the current example.

What If I compile:
* `stack.nit`
* `my_file_that_uses_stack.nit`

Also what about the stdlib? is it directly or indirectly imported here?

Reviewer: Paragraphs that list things can be broken into bullet points to make them easier to scan/read.

All contracts conditions can be declared in several ways, all are equivalent:
~~~
fun foo(a: Int, b: Int) is expect(a > 0, b < 0)
~~~
~~~
fun foo(a: Int, b: Int) is expect(a > 0 and b < 0)
~~~
~~~
fun foo(a: Int, b: Int) is expect(a > 0), ensure(b < 0)
~~~

## Writing contracts

> Methods, as well as attribute setters, can be associated with two types of contracts; precondition (`expect`) that expresses requirements of the routine´s call and postcondition (`ensure`) that expresses what the routine guarantee after her execution. Together, they define the rules to be respected between the callee and the caller. If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry then the caller can assume that the callee fulfill the `ensure` condition on exit.

Reviewer: Didn't I read the same paragraph but worded differently line 68? I prefer this version tho.

Author: The line 68 only introduces the annotations with their correspondence (`expect` = precondition, `ensure` = postcondition, `invariant` = invariant). Here I add more explanations. Do you think it's redundant?

All contracts (`expect`, `ensure`) are evaluated in the same context as the called method, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods and parameters in the condition.

When defining a contract (`expect`, `ensure`) on an attribute like bellow, only the automatically generated write property (setter) will use the contract.

~~~
var baz: Int is expect(baz > 0) # In the contract, baz refers to the parameter of the write property (setter).
~~~

### Define preconditions with `expect`

We define a precondition using the annotation `expect`. In the `Stack` class, the method `pop` defines a precondition, that a call to the method should be made on a non-empty stack.

~~~
fun pop is expect(not_empty)

> ~~~

Reviewer: I would add a client example for stack showing how to pass/break that contract.

~~~
fun push(object: T) is ensure(self[size - 1] == object)
~~~

Within an `ensure` contract we can refer to the return value of the method with the keyword `result`. In the `Stack` class, the `[]` method guarantees that, the return value is the same as the element stored in the stack at the given index.

~~~
fun [](index: Int): T is ensure(result == data[index])
~~~

Note that the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.

In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, with the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.

~~~
fun pop(object: T) is ensure(old(size) - 1 == size)
~~~

In an `old(expression)` the `expression` is evaluated in the same context as the called method. Thus, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods, and arguments.

`old(object)` stores a reference to object. By doing so, if `object` is mutated in the method the `old(object)` will also be mutated.

> Let us take a look on the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at the following example:
```

~~~
class Boat
	var position: Position

	fun move(direction: Position)
	do

> 		position =  position + direction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		position = position + direction
```

	end
end

class Position
	var x: Float
	var y: Float

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

	fun +(position: Position): Position
	is
		ensure(old(x) + position.x == x)
		nit ensure(old(y) +  position.y == y)
	do

> 		_x += position.x

Reviewer: What's up with the `_` it doesn't look like the way we traditionally write Nit code?

Author: `_` is used to access the attribute without using the write or read property. On the other hand, it's not a good practice to put in an example.

As we store a reference it's impossible to proceed like this `ensure(old(position) + direction == position)`. Several solutions exist to solve this problem:

- You can capture the changes individually like as the `+` method in the `Position` class. Which would give the following postcondition for the `move` method:

~~~
fun move(direction: Position) is ensure( old(position.x) + direction.x  == position.x and old(position.y) + direction.y  == position.y)
~~~

- You can duplicate the object `position` with a method like `clone`, so that `not old(position.clone).is_same_instance(position)` is true.

~~~
class Position
	super Cloneable
	var x: Float
	var y: Float

	redef fun clone: SELF do return new Position(x,y)
end

class Boat
	var position: Position

	fun move(direction: Position)
	is
		ensure(old(position.clone) + direction  == position)
	do
		position =  position + direction
	end
end
~~~

Note that it is often better to capture only the interesting part, rather than providing a duplication method. The duplication method is generally reserved when you deal with complex objects.

> ## Writing invariants

Reviewer: Since invariants are at the top of your example and are also easier to explain, maybe you should start by them instead of the pre/post conditions?

> Invariants are used to specify the characteristics of a class/interface which must always be true, except when executing a member function. In other words, invariants define conditions that must be respected by our instance. Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as in an incoherent state, and will cause an assertion failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Invariants are used to specify the characteristics of a class/interface which must always be true, except when executing a member function. In other words, invariants define conditions that must be respected by our instance. Any instance which does not respect one or more of those conditions will be considered as in an incoherent state, and will cause an "assertion failed" error at runtime.
```

To define an invariant we use the class annotation `invariant`. Here is an example with our Stack. The class defines that it is impossible to be in a state where the size is less than 0.

~~~
class Stack
	invariant(size >= 0)
end
~~~

Another example with a class that represents a date (day, month). To be in a consistent state, the date must be represented with a day between 1 and 31 and a month between 1 and 12.

~~~
class Date
	invariant(day >= 1 and day <= 31)
	invariant(month >= 1 and month <= 12)

	var day: Int
	var month: Int
end
~~~

When a class defines an invariant all methods and constructors (inherited, redefined and introduced) will check this one. By default, the invariants are only checked on exit. See section `Verification policy` to activate them on in and out. For all constructors the invariant is only checked at the end of this, this is due to the fact that the object is not yet initialized. See the section `Execution order` for example.

> The invariant is not checked when the calle is on `self`. The following example shows the execution of invariant:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The invariant is not checked when the call is on `self`. The following example shows the execution of invariant:
```

~~~
class A
	invariant(print_invariant)

	fun print_invariant: Bool
	do
		print "In invariant verification"
		return true
	end

	fun foo
	do
		print "In foo"
		self.bar # The called property is a member of "self", the invariant will not be checked.
	end

	fun bar
	do
		print "In bar"
	end
end

var a = new A
a.foo # The called property is not a member of "self", the invariant will be checked.
~~~

This example gives the following output:
~~~
In invariant verification
In foo
In bar
In invariant verification
~~~

## Inheritance

The Nit contracts fully support multiple inheritance and refinement. The specialization can be interpreted as subcontracting. All methods, class/interface which are redefined must keep the set of conditions defined by all the previous definitions. Here are the subtyping rules for each type of the contracts:

> * The `expect` can be weakened, which guarantees that all the contracts introduced in the previous definitions will always be considered as valid entries. During the specialization of a method it will be possible to redefine its precondition in order the widen the allowed input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `expect` can be weakened, which guarantees that all the contracts introduced in the previous definitions will always be considered as valid entries. During the specialization of a method it will be possible to redefine its preconditions in order the widen the allowed input.
```

Example:
~~~
class MyClass
	fun foo(x: Int) is abstract, expect(x == 0)
end

class MySub
	super MyClass

	redef fun foo(x: Int) is expect(x == -1)
end

class MySubSub
	super MySub

	redef fun foo(x: Int) is expect(x == -2)
end
~~~

| Class    | Condition of `foo(x)`          |
|----------|--------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `x == 0`                       |
| MySub    | `x == 0 or x == -1`            |
| MySubSub | `x == 0 or x == -1 or x == -2` |

> When refinement a precondition (`expect`) the new condition is equivalent to an `or` between the set of inherited preconditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When refining a precondition (`expect`) the new condition is equivalent to an `or` between the set of inherited preconditions.
```

* The `ensure` can be reinforced, which guarantees that all of the expected results introduced in the previous definitions must be respected. During the specialization of a method it will be possible to redefine its postcondition in order to restrict the possible outputs.

Example:
~~~
class MyClass
	fun foo: Int is abstract, ensure(result > 0)
end

class MySub
	super MyClass

	redef fun foo: Int is abstract, ensure(result > 10)
end

class MySubSub
	super MyClass

	redef fun foo: Int is abstract, ensure(result > 100)
end
~~~

| Class    | Condition of `foo`                            |
|----------|-----------------------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `result > 0`                                  |
| MySub    | `result > 0 and result > 10`                  |
| MySubSub | `result > 0 and result > 10 and result > 100` |

> When refinement a postcondition (`ensure`) the new condition is equivalent to an `and` between the set of inherited postconditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When refining a postcondition (`ensure`) the new condition is equivalent to an `and` between the set of inherited postconditions.
```

1- invariant (`invariant(i > 10)`)
2- preconditions (`expect( x > 0 )`)
3- called property (execution of the method body)
4- postconditions (`result == true`)
5- invariant (`invariant(i > 10)`)

In redefinition when you make a call to `super` the contracts is not checked again.

Example:
~~~
class A
	fun print_expect: Bool
	do
		print "In expect A"
		return true
	end

	fun foo
	is
		expect(print_expect)
	do
		print "In foo of A"
	end
end

class B
	super A

	fun print_new_expect: Bool
	do
		print "In expect B"
		return true
	end

	redef fun foo
	is
		expect(print_new_expect)
	do
		super
		print "In foo of B"
	end
end

var b = new B
b.foo
~~~

This example gives the following output:
~~~
In expect B
In foo of A
In foo of B
~~~

Note this example also shows the fact that during elevations of `expect` in an inheritance frame when one of the `expect` conditions is satisfied we stop the verification.

To summarize the evaluation order for public methods/attribute, is as follows:

1- invariant
2- preconditions (`expect`)
3- called property
4- postconditions (`ensure`)
5- invariant

For constructors only the invariant verification in entry (first step) is ignored.

> ### Options

Reviewer: Options for `nitc`? `nit`? or both?

Author: Options are available on both. I added a sentence to specify it.

	invariant(day >= 1 and day <= 31)
	invariant(month >= 1 and month <= 12)

	var day: Int
	var month: Int
end
~~~

When a class defines an invariant all methods and constructors (inherited, redefined and introduced) will check this one. By default, the invariants are only checked on exit. See section `Verification policy` to activate them on in and out. For all constructors the invariant is only checked at the end of this, this is due to the fact that the object is not yet initialized. See the section `Execution order` for example.

The invariant is not checked when the call is on `self`. The following example shows the execution of invariant:

~~~
class A
	invariant(print_invariant)

	fun print_invariant: Bool
	do
		print "In invariant verification"
		return true
	end

	fun foo
	do
		print "In foo"
		self.bar # The called property is a member of "self", the invariant will not be checked.
	end

	fun bar
	do
		print "In bar"
	end
end

var a = new A
a.foo # The called property is not a member of "self", the invariant will be checked.
~~~

This example gives the following output:
~~~nitish
In invariant verification
In foo
In bar
In invariant verification
~~~

## Writing contracts

> Methods, as well as attribute setters, can be associated with two types of contracts; precondition (`expect`) that expresses requirements of the routine´s call and postcondition (`ensure`) that expresses what the routine guarantee after her execution. Together, they define the rules to be respected between the callee and the caller. If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry then the caller can assume that the callee fulfill the `ensure` condition on exit.

Reviewer 2: Il y a deux erreurs de grammaire:
If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry then the caller can assume that the callee fulfill the `ensure` condition on exit.
-> 
If the caller fulfills the `expect` condition on entry**,** then the caller can assume that the callee **fulfills** the `ensure` condition on exit.

All contracts (`expect`, `ensure`) are evaluated in the same context as the called method, it's possible to refer to attributes, methods and parameters in the condition.

> When defining a contract (`expect`, `ensure`) on an attribute like bellow, only the automatically generated write property (setter) will use the contract.

Reviewer 2: Éviter de faire des "like below" dans un texte, c'est moins convivial à lire. De plus, tu n'es pas obligé de spécifier que les setter sont automatiquement générer. Étant donné que les attributs sont une pair de getter/setter tu peux dire directement qu'il s'applique uniquement au setter. 

"Contract attributes are only applied to the write property (setter)"

Pas obligé de répéter que contract veut dire "expect" ou "ensure" une deuxième fois, tu le spécifies déjà plutôt.

~~~nitish
var baz: Int is expect(baz > 0) # In the contract, baz refers to the parameter of the write property (setter).
~~~

### Define preconditions with `expect`

We define a precondition using the annotation `expect`. In the `Stack` class, the method `pop` defines a precondition, that a call to the method should be made on a non-empty stack.

~~~nitish
fun pop is expect(not_empty)
~~~

### Define postconditions with `ensure`

We define a postcondition using the annotation `ensure`. In the `Stack` class, the method `push` defines postconditions. The first guarantee defines that, the method must add the element received as argument (`object`) at the top of the stack.

~~~nitish
fun push(object: T) is ensure(self[size - 1] == object)
~~~

Within an `ensure` contract we can refer to the return value of the method with the keyword `result`. In the `Stack` class, the `[]` method guarantees that, the return value is the same as the element stored in the stack at the given index.

~~~nitish
fun [](index: Int): T is ensure(result == data[index])
~~~

Note that the keyword `result` can only be used when the method has a return parameter.

> In `ensure` we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call with the using of `old` keyword. Again, with the `pop` method, we can ensure that the `size` of the stack after the method call will be the same as before minus one `old(size) - 1 == size`.

Reviewer 2: Phrase bizarre vers la fin: before the method call with the using of old
->
In an ensure expression, we can refer to any arguments and instance variables before the method call, using the `old` keyword.

As we store a reference it's impossible to proceed like this `ensure(old(position) + direction == position)`. Several solutions exist to solve this problem:

- You can capture the changes individually like as the `+` method in the `Position` class. Which would give the following postcondition for the `move` method:

~~~nitish
fun move(direction: Position) is ensure( old(position.x) + direction.x  == position.x and old(position.y) + direction.y  == position.y)
~~~

- You can duplicate the object `position` with a method like `clone`, so that `not old(position.clone).is_same_instance(position)` is true.

~~~nitish
class Position
	super Cloneable
	var x: Float
	var y: Float

	redef fun clone: SELF do return new Position(x,y)
end

class Boat
	var position: Position

	fun move(direction: Position)
	is
		ensure(old(position.clone) + direction  == position)
	do
		position =  position + direction
	end
end
~~~

Note that it is often better to capture only the interesting part, rather than providing a duplication method. The duplication method is generally reserved when you deal with complex objects.

## Inheritance

> The Nit contracts fully support multiple inheritance and refinement. The specialization can be interpreted as subcontracting. All methods, class/interface which are redefined must keep the set of conditions defined by all the previous definitions. Here are the subtyping rules for each type of the contracts:

Reviewer 2: Le mot "fully" apporte rien à ta phrase, car le mot "support" est suffisant. Pourquoi ajouter des mots inutiles? Tes contrats supportent ou ne supportent pas? C'est tout ou rien, il n'y a pas de "supporte à 50%".

| Class    | Condition of `foo`                            |
|----------|-----------------------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `result > 0`                                  |
| MySub    | `result > 0 and result > 10`                  |
| MySubSub | `result > 0 and result > 10 and result > 100` |

When refining a postcondition (`ensure`) the new condition is equivalent to an `and` between the set of inherited postconditions.

* The `invariant` can be reinforced, which guarantees that constraints of validated state previously defined in the superclasses/interfaces must be respected. The specialization of a class makes it possible to restrict all of the valid states. The objective is that an object must always be considered as a coherent value of all of its superclasses/interfaces.

Example:
~~~
class MyClass
	invariant(i > 0)
	var i: Int
end

class MySub
	super MyClass
	invariant(i > 10)
end

class MySubSub
	super MySub
	invariant(i > 100)
end
~~~

| Class    | Condition of `invariant`       |
|----------|--------------------------------|
| MyClass  | `i > 0`                        |
| MySub    | `i > 0 and i > 10`             |
| MySubSub | `i > 0 and i > 10 and i > 100` |

> When we specialize or refine a class, its invariant is equal to an `and` between the set of inherited invariants and the new condition.

Reviewer 2: Je suggère de rempalcer par:  When we specialize or refine a class, its invariants are `AND`ed between the inherited and new conditions.

> Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no_contract`  annotation. This annotation should be used only in very specific cases (use it when; it´s really necessary and you know what you are doing).

Reviewer 2: le mot "however" doit toujours être entre une pair de virgule s'il ne début pas une phrase.
Nit, however, offers the ...
Personnellement je l'enleverais, car elle ajoute rien a ta phrase, à l'exception de rendre la lecture plus compliqué.

> Nit however offers the possibility of removing the inheritance of contracts with the `no_contract`  annotation. This annotation should be used only in very specific cases (use it when; it´s really necessary and you know what you are doing).

Reviewer 2: Remplace "should be used only in very specific cases" par "should be used sparingly", ça veut dire la même chose mais de manière beaucoup plus concise.

Example:
~~~
class MyClass
	fun foo(x: Int) is abstract, ensure(x == 0)
end

class MySub
	super MyClass

	redef fun foo(x: Int) is no_contract
end
~~~

| Class   | Condition of `foo(x)` |
|---------|-----------------------|
| MyClass | `i == 0`              |
| MySub   | `none`                |

## Execution

> When performing the evaluation of a contract, all routines and elements will be executed without the evaluation of contracts. The objective is to remove the potential risk of falling into an infinite loop of verification.

Reviewer 2: C'est bizarre comme phrase, ça me semble contradictoire. "lorsqu'on évalue les contrats, ... on les exécute sans évaluer". Dans la même phrase tu dis que tu évalues et tu n'évalues pas?
